>> So the term archetype is
something that was introduced
into psychology by the Swiss
psychiatrist, Carl Gustav Jung,
who was initially a
follower of Freud,
but then became a renegade
and expanded Freud's concept
of the human unconscious
from the idea that it was
an individual unconscious,
something that is related
to the postnatal history, that
it contains things that we have
rejected, that we
have forgotten,
that we have repressed.
He extended it to the concept
of collective unconscious,
that somehow each of us carries
the entire history of humanity,
and also the cultural
history, which
would be the mythologies,
the mythological figures
and the domains from mythology.
And that we have access
to them, even if we
don't know them intellectually.
And then he discovered
that within the collective
unconscious there are certain
governing or organizing
principles.
The concept is related
really to the Platonic ideal,
that there is a normally
invisible and not
available to any
of the human senses
realm, which is
the realm of what
he called Ideas or Forms, which
would be written with capital
letters.
And these actually,
according to him,
would form and inform
what is happening here,
in the same way
as Plato believed
that what is happening
on this level
is actually governed by these
primordial cosmic patterns.
He thought this is the
concept of archetypes.
>> So that actually then
explains archetypal astrology,
correct?
That if the planets
represent forces, then
they have an impact on our
behavior here on Earth?
>> Yeah, this then becomes, of
course, critical for astrology,
where we have to now expend
our entire understanding
of the universe, where the
universe is not a material
system that created itself, but
has been created by a superior
intelligence.
And the order,
such that there is
a domain of this primordial
patterns of the archetypes,
and that determines what
is happening on our level.
And the dynamics, the
interactions of the archetypes,
would be systematically
correlated
with the movement of the planets
and the angular relationships
that they have.
So in this kind of understanding
the planets don't do anything,
they don't cause anything.
We are not talking about
gravitational fields
or radiation coming
from these planets,
but they indicate
in a sense what
is happening in the
archetypal world,
and what kind of energies that
we can expect on this level.
So it's more like what the
function of the watch is.
It's telling us what time it
is, something that we cannot
experience directly.
But there are all
kinds of other things
that are systematically
correlated with this time,
and we can use all of them
to infer what time it is.
>> So then a planetary
configuration is an indicator
of forces that are at work?
>> Yes, so let's say in
an astrological chart,
the planets stand
for archetypes,
like Venus for beauty and love
and warm relationships and art
and aesthetics.
And so Mars would be
related to prowess
and the sort of masculine
power, yang in the Eastern
understanding, even all the
way to aggression, and so on.
Neptune would represent the
mystical domain or also water,
ocean, and so on.
So those are representatives
of principles
that can have actually
three different forms.
Rick Tarnis in his book
talks about archetypes
as having, on the one hand,
the kind of Homeric aspect
that they could be seen as
deities, Aphrodite, Pluto,
Mars, and so on, which
would be the sort
of mythological or Homeric
understanding of archetypes.
The archetypes also can be seen
as philosophical principles,
the way Plato saw it,
the idea that forms.
Or they can have
psychological aspects,
which is the way Jung brought it
into psychological principles.
And he discovered that in this
collective unconscious certain
governing principles, certain
organizing cosmic principles,
and he used that term
archetype for them.
When Rick Tarnas wrote
about it in his book,
"Cosmos and Psyche," he showed
that you can see archetypes
from three different
perspectives.
The first one he
called Homeric, and you
can see the archetypes as
deities, Aphrodite, Mars,
Pluto, and so on.
Then you can also see them from
a philosophical perspective.
That Plato's idea
of what he called
Ideas or Forms, as
capital letters,
and for Plato those
were principles
existing or operating
from a domain
that's not perceptible
to the senses,
yet they form and inform what
is happening on this level.
And then the third perspective
that Rick Tarnas mentions
is the psychological
perspective,
which is the way it appears in
the psychology of Carl Gustav
Jung, and they see them
as principles operating
in the psyche primarily.
The term psyche is not easy
to explain in simple terms,
because there are very different
concepts and understanding
of the psyche.
Usually, it's understood
as the human psyche,
and in materialistic
science that
would be the product
of the brain,
of the neurophysiological
processes in the brain,
and would involve anything from
our perceptions of the world,
our emotions, our thoughts.
But on the other hand, we have
the concepts coming, let's say,
from Eastern philosophies,
that in Western psychiatry
emerge in the form
of the work of Jung,
where the psyche
really is cosmic.
He talks about anima mundi.
And our individual psyche
would be actually teased out
of this cosmic fabric.
In other words,
in that sense, it
would reach far
beyond something that
could be found
inside of our brain
or it would come from our brain.
It has to do with the existence
of the universe itself,
and would be closely related
to, let's say, the Hindu concept
that the universe is created
by absolute consciousness.
Brahman, and that
we carry somehow
a spark of this cosmic
energy, which is called Atman.
So the Hindus will tell
you we are not Namarupa,
we are not name and shape.
We are not body ego.
Our true identity is with
this divine spark, Atman.
And when we experience
it we realize
that energy that we carry is
identical with the energy that
created the universe.
>> So then when someone has a
hallucinogenic, or I'm sorry,
when someone has a
psychedelic experience,
their personal individual psyche
then expands to open to this
cosmic psyche?
Is that what's happening?
>> Yes, I'd like to mention,
it's a very interesting
observation that came
actually from Aldous Huxley,
a famous British American
philosopher and writer who
experimented with
mescaline and also LSD.
And he said that initially
he thought that somehow
that these substances activate
certain contents, anagrams
in the brain, and that they
emerge into consciousness.
And then when he
looked into it deeper
he said now he sees the
human brain actually
has a reducing valve.
That there is the psyche is
much, much larger and the brain
actually limits
the access that we
have to this cosmic
reservoir, which is
a very interesting perspective.
The boundaries between
the individual psyche
and this larger cosmic
psyche would not be absolute.
They would be permeable and what
I call the holotropic states,
which is a certain important
category of non-ordinary states
of consciousness.
>> So a non-ordinary state
of consciousness, in fact,
then is just sort of
experiencing the world from
a greater perspective than
what materialistic society has
taught us to acknowledge?
>> Within the usual concept in
materialistic science is that
the universe is out
there, it's material,
and that we somehow managed to
perceive it through the senses,
the mediation of the brain.
But from this
larger perspectives,
there are other dimensions of
existence that are normally not
accessible to our senses unless
we are in this special expanded
state of consciousness
that could be brought not
only by psychedelic
plants and substances,
but they could also be reached
by meditation practices,
shamanic practices, and so on.
And for some people, these deep
domains emerge spontaneously.
Now, for traditional psychiatry
this would be a mental disease.
You see, this idea that this
additional kind of experiences
that we don't know
in everyday life
are created by some
pathological process interacting
with the brain.
And what modern
consciousness research
has shown that these are what we
would call ontologically real.
These dimensions really exist,
but they are not normally
available to our senses.
We have to be in a special
state of consciousness,
and that state is
not pathological.
In a sense, it's supernormal.
What the mystics experience
is not a distorted perception
of the world, but
they get access
to these normally invisible
but real dimensions of reality.
So a mystic would
not have the feeling
now my perception of
the world is distorted.
They would have
the feeling now I
am getting an enormous
amount of information that
actually helps me understand who
am I and what it is all about.
It's kind of additional
and clarifying interesting
information that is
coming, not a distortion.
Well, the initial
excitement when LSD first
came from Sandoz
pharmaceutical company
to universities and
research institutes
was that this can
produce what we would be
called experimental psychosis.
And this was fascinating,
because we are talking
about microscopic amounts.
We are talking about
millionth of gram,
hundred millionths
of gram can change
profoundly human consciousness
for six to eight hours.
And so the initial
excitement was, first of all,
that we have a model
here of psychosis.
We can give it to, quote
unquote, "normal" people.
We can do all kinds of tests
before, during, and after,
and we get an idea of
what's happening in the body
biologically, biochemically,
when the psyche is
so profoundly influenced.
Now, the idea was that
if this is the case, then
under certain circumstances
the human body
can produce substance
of that kind,
and that mental diseases would
not be really mental diseases.
They would be
aberrations of chemistry.
The body would
produce substances
that would change the
functioning of the brain.
Now, if we could identify this
chemical culprit we could also
find ways of counteracting
it, find some kind
of neutralizing agent.
And this would have
been like a test tube
solution of schizophrenia
and other psychosis.
This would be like Holy
Grail of psychiatry.
So initially, there
were all kinds
of pathological
associations, where
we talked about hallucinogens,
about deliriogenic,
about psychosomatic substances,
about experimental psychosis,
and so on.
And the initial
research that we did
was actually along these lines,
looking for some solution
for schizophrenia primarily.
And then as we were
experimenting with it,
I found out something
fascinating,
which convinced me that
we were not really doing
psychopharmacology.
Which was incredible
what we call
inter-individual variation.
It was different people
with the same dosage
under the same
circumstances, everybody
would have a completely
different experience.
And then if the same person
would take it repeatedly,
then also each of the
sessions would be different.
So this is not the way
pharmacology works.
You have a pretty good
idea what response
you would get with
antibiotics or strychnine
or whatever substance
we are talking about.
Otherwise, we would
not have pharmacology
or psychopharmacology.
And so I realized that this we
are dealing with a catalyst,
you see.
And that the content is not
produced by the substances,
but it's released from the
deep unconscious realms
that current psychiatry and
psychology does not know about.
Because when it comes, they
think it's pathological.
They don't see it
as something that's
germane to the human psyche.
And then I started seeing it as
a telescope, or a microscope,
something that provides access
to areas which are not normally
available.
Like a telescope we can
see galaxies that we cannot
normally study.
With microscope, you discover
an enormous micro world
that is here, but we
are not aware of it
unless we have the proper tool.
And so then I took it
from the laboratory
to the clinical practice
and started seeing it
as something that's going
to deepen and intensify
psychotherapy.
>> And then didn't you find
too in this process that once
people had expressed this deep
material that many had no idea
was even in there, that they
were healed or in a sense they
were less impacted by whatever
motivated their suffering
in the first place?
That after releasing this
material they were somehow
more balanced as human beings?
>> There's a tremendous
acceleration,
this tremendous deepening.
I mean, I was in
psychoanalysis for seven years.
And when in the fourth year I
started bringing in my dreams
images that were oral,
related to the oral period,
this was considered to
be relatively successful
psychoanalysis.
Whereas, with psychedelics,
you can go with larger dosage
you can go to birth and
pre-birth in the first session.
I've seen people who
compared one session to years
of analysis or they
got beyond where they
got in years of psychoanalysis.
>> And I'm just curious, Stan,
also in terms of what you
noticed something
in the sessions.
First, I want to talk
about yesterday we touched
on the courage, or how you
learned that even though people
thought they might be dying in
the course of their session,
they really weren't.
That it was really
just their psyche,
the information that was
coming up from their psyche
that they were working through.
Can you talk about that?
>> That they realized
that it was coming from--
>> Well rather, that as you
worked with these patients
during your
psychedelic sessions,
first you started with
lower doses, correct?
And that was more
biographical information?
And then as the dose increased
you witnessed that it moved--
>> Yeah, we used
initially lower dosages.
I mean, at the beginning,
the common dose
was 100, 150, and so
on, and maybe up to 200
in the clinical work.
So what came initially
for most people
were sort of geometrical
aesthetic kind of experiences.
That was what we
know now as sort
of psychedelic art
and so on, and then
the biographical level.
But if the sessions
were continued
we were getting deeper.
And one of my patients
called it the onion peeling
of the psyche, like
going layer after layer.
Which was very
fascinating because you
could see how different
levels in the psyche
are interconnected and
how it is connected
to symptoms, at which point
the symptoms would be modified.
But then when we had a
certain number of sessions
or increased the dosage, then
suddenly levels of the psyche
were manifesting that are
not part of psychoanalysis.
If these levels would somehow
open up during psychoanalysis,
a traditional
psychoanalyst would
think this is the
end of psychoanalysis
and would send that patient
to psychiatrists, because they
would feel that they are opening
up the psychotic terrain.
Our model does not
have reliving of birth.
Now, if somebody had difficult
birth and it starts coming up,
it's going to be wild and people
would be screaming and shaking
and choking, and so on.
So this would be
seen as pathology,
and your ordinary psychoanalysis
couldn't handle it,
so they would now be sent
to a psychiatrist, which
has happened quite a few
times, including my analyst
had a patient like that.
>> Did you observe--
I guess what I remember is that
you had a series of patients
that had similar
experiences, and then
when your own experiences,
your own LSD sessions,
it became clear to you that
people were re-experiencing
the birth process.
Can you describe
how that passed?
How that came to be?
>> Well, I started seeing
patterns when I was working
these serial sessions
with a lot for patients.
Some of the patterns
were individual.
I found out that the
contents in the unconscious
were not stored in a form of
kind of disconnected mosaic,
but they were forming certain
dynamic constellations, where
certain issues were
appearing on different levels
at different times
of their biography.
And they were creating
these dynamic packets
that were connected with
the same type of emotions
or a physical feeling.
Let's say, they would have
a choking constellation,
like there would be a situation
of near drowning when they were
seven, then being choked by
an older brother at the time
repeatedly when they were
four, then whooping cough.
But then the deeper level
was the choking at birth.
So I started talking about these
constellations as COEX systems.
>> Could you describe
COEX, because that's really
important.
I find in my LSD sessions
that COEX experiences
are incredibly profound.
It's sort of like almost
going down a drain.
Can you describe what a COEX is?
>> Yeah, it's a constellation
of experiences or events from
different periods of your
postnatal life that share
in emotion or physical feelings.
So with choking
in COEX that could
be COEX that has to do with
your bad experiences with men.
That could be serious of
relationships and maybe teacher
and then father.
There could be
experiences that have
to do with being
contained, being confined.
In some situations,
I had for example,
patients who were locked
in a closet for punishment.
Or there were quite
a few patients
who experienced in
infancy swaddling,
was a situation where very, very
tightly bound to the infants.
So they experienced either
complete confinement
or complete freedom,
and nothing in between.
And that could be an overlay
over the situation at birth,
where something like
that is happening.
So there could be
that kind of a COEX.
Or even a person in
prison and then some kind
of containing situation
from childhood,
and then being stuck in birth.
So there's a theme,
there's a topic
in the COEX that penetrates
all the different layers.
And then there's also a
specific connection then
to emotional problems.
Let's say, note that
confinement would be associated
to claustrophobia, let's say.
The choking COEX
could be related
to asthma, psychogenic asthma.
>> And then you also
observed, I believe,
that beyond the perinatal
memories-- in fact,
could you describe the
four perinatal matrices?
>> Yes, when my patients
were regressing through
their biographical history and
they came to birth I noticed
that the experiences were
forming four quite distinct
experiential patterns.
And then in time, I
realized on the basis
also of the reports
of the patients,
that these patterns were related
to four consecutive stages
of birth, characterized by
certain specific emotions,
specific physical feelings.
But they also represented
a selective opening
into the next level, which
we now call transpersonal.
So the first matrix
of this kind was
related to being in the womb.
Either a womb that was very
pleasant, very comfortable,
or a womb that was
toxic, or where
the mother was sick, and so on.
The second one was a situation
when now birth starts,
the uterus is contracting,
but the cervix is not open.
So the experience
of this confinement,
being in a kind of seemingly
hopeless situation.
And then another
matrix would be when
the cervix opens and the
contractions continue,
but now there is a way out.
There is a struggle to
get out, to free oneself.
And the fourth pattern is
actually the actual coming out.
So I started talking about them
as basic perinatal matrices,
or BPM.
So at the bottom
of the COEX systems
there typically was
one of those matrices,
depending on the nature of
the experiences in the COEX.
There were very
painful COEXes, there
are also very positive
COEXes, all kinds
of very fulfilling, beautiful
situations from your life.
There's an overlay over
experience of the good womb,
or good breastfeeding,
and so on.
And then I found out
later that the COEX also
had even deeper roots
linking them, let's say,
to what seemed to be
a past life experience
or what seemed to be a specific
archetype, or even animal
experiences or phylogenetic
experiences, ancestral
experiences, and so on.
Because the planet in your
chart stand for archetypes,
they're related to the
archetypes, and the angular
relationships between them,
which will be like opposition
or what's called
square or conjunction,
they would characterize
the COEX system.
And the layers of
the COEX system
would be created at the time
in some significant transit
activates that particular
core, which is already
contained in your chart.
>> So then if someone
through a non-ordinary state
of consciousness is able to
sort of go into that COEX system
and have the deep experience of
passing through the perinatal
experience of that, and
even into the transpersonal,
that's considered a full
experience of that COEX?
>> See, when having had strict
materialistic education,
medicine in a Marxist country,
I found it easiest to open up
the thinking and
including birth,
because there is a
material system there very,
very highly advanced.
So it's actually bizarre that
current psychiatry does not
recognize that
there is a trauma.
That biological birth
is a psychotrauma.
But when we go to these
transpersonal experiences,
you cannot find any kind
of material substrate.
And so then I discovered with
a lot of intellectual struggle
the transpersonal domain,
the archetypes, the past life
experience.
That was more
difficult to accept.
But then an even larger
kind of perspective
opened up when the whole
process was actually governed
by archetypal dynamics.
So it's really the realm,
the archetypal realm,
that determines what kind of
experiences would be coming up.
Let's say, the person
would have a session
in which there's a lot of
no exit kind of situation.
And they would have
the feeling this is
like the world of Franz Kafka.
They would suddenly feel this is
the way the existentialist saw
existence.
They really had it down, they
really describe the way it is.
Everybody who sees it
differently is just rosy
glasses.
They would have some
kind of association
to movies of Bergman and the
scenes from Nazi Germany.
And then you find out that that
person has some hard Saturn
Pluto transit.
And if you look at
these situations
the common denominator
is again Saturn Pluto.
You find it as significant
in Jean-Paul Sartre's chart,
in Ingmar Bergman's
chart, in Kafka's chart.
And you find out this was the
world of transit at the time
with the Nazi things were
happening with the Second World
War.
So the archetype is really a
clue to understanding what's
happening in your session.
>> I think I remember one
time asking you from Joseph
Campbell's "Hero's Journey,"
from that perspective,
what are your magical tools?
And you mentioned mythology
and archetypal astrology.
Is that accurate?
>> Well, I shouldn't say that,
but in this work I found much
more help in mythology and
archetypal psychology than
in my psychiatric or
medical examination.
That played a role
only when I was
looking at the condition
of the patients in terms
of indications,
contraindications
for psychedelics and
for the breathwork.
But once I knew that we were
working with healthy people,
there is not much
medicine in it.
And psychiatry
would be misleading.
I mean, it would
prevent you actually
from correctly understanding
what is happening.
So people who work with the
breathwork or with psychedelic,
they have to unlearn
a lot of what they
were taught at the university.
>> That's interesting.
>> Many, many people that I
worked with, professionals,
got to recognize and appreciate
the value of shamanic
practices, actually ended up
going to Peru or to Brazil
working.
And realizing that,
in some instances,
the shamans of
the Native culture
have a better understanding
of the psyche than you
get from Harvard
or from Stanford.
>> Well, I remember when I
learned shamanic journey work
with Michael Harner 20
something years ago,
there were about 150
people in the room.
And probably 3/4 of them were
psychiatrists, psychologists,
and therapists.
So they were there to gain
a deeper understanding.
>> Yeah.
The work with these
non-ordinary states,
particularly what I call
holotropic and subgroup, that
is healing transformative,
evolutionary,
that has also a
heuristic value, HUR.
The revolutionary
information that you
can get from these
experiences and observations,
they ask for urgent
revision radical overhaul
of our thinking in
psychiatry and psychology.
This was going to be a
major paradigm shift,
and it's going to take a
while because it really
changes most of the basic
assumptions in psychiatry.
And so bringing traditional
kind of training,
psychological,
psychiatric training,
is going to be an obstacle.
It's going to make you less
effective or ineffective
in this kind of work.
>> There's this phrase
cartography of the psyche,
and a lot of people credit
you with creating a whole new
cartography of the psyche.
So if you could
describe, what was that?
I think you already
have to some degree,
but the cartography
of the psyche when
you began as a
psychiatrist was just
limited to one's personal
experience, is that correct?
>> Well the current model
cartography, if you want,
that's being used in psychiatry
and psychology is limited
to post-natal biography.
The idea that the
psychological history
begins after we are born,
this follows Freud's dictum.
The newborn is a
tabula rasa, it's
like a tabula
rasa, erased tablet
where they were
writing in ancient Rome
because they washed blackboard.
So there's nothing
that precedes birth
that is of any relevance
for psychiatry,
including birth itself.
There's no
recognition that birth
is a trauma, major trauma.
So somehow the
brain of the newborn
is not able to notice that
something strange is happening,
and there is no record of that.
Which is absolutely
absurd, because there's
a general agreement
in child psychiatry
and obstetrics that
what immediately follows
is extremely important.
Nuances of nursing
can make a difference
for the rest of the
life of the individual.
There's even an
agreement that bonding,
which is exchange of the
looks between the mother
and the child, can influence
the whole relationship
between those two individuals.
And people who sort
of accept this,
they think that the hours of a
life threatening, potentially
life threatening
experience that preceded
is not relevant psychologically.
I mean, I cannot follow that
logic in a group of people who
were trained in rigid sort of
logical, rational thinking.
So that's the present model.
So what had to be
added is that there
is a powerful record
of the experiences,
of all the four stages of birth.
And it's supported by the
fact that there is now
a prenatal research showing
sensitivity of the fetus
already in the womb, and
it goes way beyond you
don't need a brain
to have memory.
The usual argument is the
newborn's brain cannot create
memory of birth because it's
not what's called myelinized.
The covering of the neurons
by the myelin sheaths-- myelin
is a fatty substance.
It's not completed.
That's given as a
reason why there
couldn't be memory of birth.
At the same time, a Nobel Prize
was given 15 years ago or so
to Eric Kandel for studying
memory mechanisms in a sea
slug called Aplysia.
Sea slugs can have memories,
but this complex organ
of the newborn,
brain of the newborn,
is not able to record anything
from hours of a potentially
life threatening situation.
So that's one major very logical
expansion that has to happen.
Even in psychedelics, we just
need some straight thinking
that's not influenced
by the trauma itself.
It's so scary that you don't
want to go there, and think
about it.
You come up with some story
why that was not relevant.
But then it expands
and then you have
to add the domain that was so
thoroughly explored by Jung
and his followers, the
collective unconscious,
both the historical
and archetypal domain.
So this is cartography
we have to have to make
our understanding better.
We cannot have adequate
understanding of emotional
psychosomatic problems unless
we use this cartography,
and we will not be very
effective by treating emotional
psychosomatic problem.
Because talking-- you
cannot talk at birth.
You cannot reach those levels.
You need experiential
method where
people can deal
with the emotions,
and they can release the
pent up blocked energy
that comes from the situation.
>> We once talked
about a pyromaniac,
the kind of experiences that
someone might have in the birth
process that remain
sort of unconscious
or in the subconscious, and
that an individual might be
propelled to certain
behavior as a young person
or into adulthood, as a sort of
unconscious desire to recreate
that experience to sort
of make peace with it.
Can you describe that?
Because that was
fascinating to me.
>> Yeah, well what you
see, if you have this kind
of understanding you can see
many of the conditions that are
considered pathology as a kind
of a misguided or I would say,
as an attempt at healing,
which is based on inadequate
understanding of
what is happening.
So for example, various
sadomasochistic practices,
where people need to be
choked at the same time
they are experiencing
sexual arousal.
They have to be bound, they
have to be confined, so on,
that is a situation
that you would
have in people who are reliving
what I call the third matrix.
The struggle through
the birth canal,
where the choking and
the pain generates
a lot of sexual feelings.
Now, if these people
would have that experience
in a psychedelic session
or a holotropic session,
or even supported
spiritual emergency,
they would clear somehow this
memory, the traumatic memory,
and it would move them to
the fourth matrix, which
is coming out.
Now, they somehow feel that they
need that kind of experience,
but they don't know that for it
to be really healing and useful
it would have to come
from their unconscious,
with understanding
what you are dealing
with where it is coming from.
Just sort of
fabricating this kind
of a situation in everyday life
without this deeper connection
will just create a need to
repeat it again and again,
because you feel that it
should bring something
that is not bringing you.
And like the arsonist
is another example.
For many people, the
coming out, the transition
from the third to
the fourth matrix,
is associated with experience
of fire, passing through fire,
being burned in fire.
It could be connected
with the past life
experience of being burned
at the stake or in a house.
And then it's
experienced at the time
of the transition, the opening.
And so they can be in
a psychological state
where they feel that somehow
experiencing enormous fire
would be fantastic for them,
bring something fantastic.
And so they actually do,
and they start the fire.
And when they are
watching it they
experience some excitement.
And then the fire is
over, but it didn't
deliver what they expected.
So they would try again
because the feeling
that they need something
like that is very strong.
Now, the extreme
form, of course,
is when people are
somehow at the transition.
What's emerging is now the
situation when they were born,
but it's not really emerging
fully, which would be healing.
But it's sort of strong
enough to the threshold
of consciousness that they
feel that they should die.
There's an experience of
ego death and rebirth.
But in our culture, you cannot
die in any other way than
killing the body, because you're
thought that you are your body.
Whereas, what this is
about is the experience,
death followed by rebirth.
So the work with these
people would be somehow
sending them a message that
it's not the result of pathology
that they're sick,
they're depressed,
and this is why
they want to die.
And that if we
treat them they're
not going to not have
this death wish anymore.
You would say no, you want
to die, we'll help you die,
but let's leave
the body out of it.
All you want is an
experience of death,
and that's going to be
followed by rebirth.
So we would somehow
work with them
and actually activate
the unconscious
where this matrix
is coming, and they
will have the very convincing
experience of death that's
been followed by rebirth.
So suicidal tendencies
of this kind,
it's mostly for
violent suicide, they
are there could be seen as
a confusion between suicide
and egocide.
People want this death
of the ego followed
by a major expansion
of consciousness,
as compared to death, which
is destruction of your body.